.. _automation:

Automation with Platter
=======================

Platter is built with automation in mind.  There are a handful of tools
you can use platter together with to make automated deployments a reality.

Automated Building
------------------

To automate the building process we recommend `fabric
<http://www.fabfile.org/>`_.  Fabric can be used to upload the source
artifacts on a build server, then invoke the building process there and to
fetch down the resulting build artifact.  This allows you to trigger a
build from any machine even if it does not have the correct architecture
or operating system.

You will need ``fabric`` installed locally and a `fabfile.py` that looks
something like this::

    import os
    import tempfile
    from fabric.api import task, local, run, cd, get, hosts


    @task
    @hosts('my-build-server-hostname')
    def build(rev='HEAD'):
        # ask git to create an archive for the right version.
        tmp = tempfile.mktemp(suffix='.tar.gz')
        local('git archive "%s" | gzip > "%s"' % (rev, tmp))

        # upload that archive to a temporary folder
        buildtmp = '/tmp/build-%s' % os.urandom(20).encode('hex')
        put(tmp, '%s/src.tar.gz' % buildtmp)

        # In that folder
        with cd(buildtmp):
            # extract the uploaded archive
            run('tar xzf src.tar.gz')
            # and invoke platter to build it
            run('/path/to/venv/bin/platter build .')
            # then download the archive and place it in `dist`
            local('mkdir -p dist')
            get('dist/*.tar.gz', 'dist')

        # Clean up
        run('rm -rf %s' % buildtmp)

This example requires a few things:

1.  in this case we use git as source control system.  If you use
    something else you will need to adjust the code accordingly.
2.  platter is installed on the build server into ``/path/to/venv`` into a
    virtualenv.  You can obviously adjust this.

To build the package you can then run this::

    $ fab build

Or to build a specific version::

    $ fab build:rev=1.0-rc1

The resulting build artifact will end up in the `dist` directory next to
the fabfile.

Automated Installing
--------------------

For automated installation the archive can be placed on a server,
extracted and installed.  The usually recommended way for this is to
extract the package to a version specific folder and to then symlink the
virtualenv to an alias.

This is easy to accomplish because the tarball generated by platter
contains metadata that can be used by tools.  For instance it contains a
file named ``VERSION`` with the version number.

Here an example `fabfile.py` which can upload a package to hosts::

    import os
    from fabric.api import task, put, run, cd

    @task
    def deploy(archive=None):
        # If not archive is provided, we use the 'last' one
        if archive is None:
            archive = os.path.join('dist',
                sorted(os.path.listdir('dist'))[-1])

        # Uplaod the archive and make some temporary space in /tmp
        put(filename, '/tmp/yourpackage.tar.gz')
        run('rm -rf /tmp/yourpackage && mkdir -p /tmp/yourpackage')

        # Now enter the temporary folder
        with cd('/tmp/yourpackage'):
            # Extract the archive, throwing away the toplevel folder
            run('tar --strip-components=1 -xzf /tmp/yourpackage.tar.gz')

            # Ask for the version
            version = str(run('cat VERSION'))

            # Install into a version specific directory
            run('./install.sh /srv/yourpackage/versions/%s' % version)

            # Create a symlink for the current version
            run('ln -sf %s /srv/yourpackage/versions/current' % version)

        # Clean up the mess
        run('rm -rf /tmp/yourpackage /tmp/yourpackage.tar.gz')

You can then deploy an archive trivially::

    $ fab -H myserver deploy
